Design document and initial proto (#1)
shawon-crosen/teleport-challenge: design.md

* Listing jobs
* Stopping and restarting processes
* Task resource management (CPU, memory, etc)
* User management
* Automated certificate creation

## Approach
The current approach for this project is to create something as simple and straightforward as possible. This means that I will not be using any external libraries or dependencies, and will try to leverage the Linux operating system’s existing tooling as much as possible instead of trying to reinvent the wheel. 

This design will cut a lot of corners and leave a lot of ideal functionality out of the initial implementation. I have noted things that should be considered as `Future Improvements` in each section.

## API
The API will use gRPC to route requests from the client to the server. The API will run locally on the machine that is being managed from the client. We will have a single user on the machine we are running processes on named `processrunner`.

The API will accept POST requests for running processes and GET requests to return the status and output of a job. More detailed implementation details for the API can be found in the .proto document.

At a high level the API will have the following routes:

> ### POST

Reviewer: These look like HTTP routes/a HTTP based API, not a gRPC API 😅 Am I missing something here?

Author: Oh yes my bad, I'm still used to thinking in terms of HTTP and missed updating this in my review. I will make an update.

Author: @strideynet I have updated these to show the grpc methods being called.

### Scoping Requests
In order to scope requests to each client we will create a temporary directory in /tmp for the username passed in from the client, which will be where the output files are written to.

#### Future Improvements
* Use a certificate provider for the CA instead of a locally generating one
* Utilize client certificate details to implement more fine grained access
* Implement a dedicated secret management solution for private keys, such as Vault or AWS Secret Manager (or any other secure key store)
* Automate certificate management going forward to remove human error and allow for easier revocation and rotation
* Create actual users on the server to manage finer grained permissions for clients and derive the username from the client certificate
* Add monitoring for certificate expiration and authentication failures

### Library
The library will primarily utilize the builtin os package in Go to interact with the Linux operating system and accomplish the actual job management functions.

The library will primarily utilize the os/exec builtin, with some use of the os/user and base level os builtin packages.

### Output streaming

> In order to reduce overhead each command will pipe output to a file named with the pid of the process. We will then use the tail binary to read data from the file and provide the output, leaning on the Linux built in's optimizations. We will utilize server side streaming from gRPC to serve this data continually to the client until they close the connection.

Reviewer: It seems a little odd to me to leverage `tail` rather than just directly reading the file? Is there any benefit to your approach?

Author: My thinking was tail is already optimized to do the operation of streaming from a file, so instead of recreating that functionality in the code we could just leverage the existing tooling.

I was opting for this as the challenge prompt asked for the ability to stream output without busy waiting or polling, which would be the most straightforward way of handling reading from a file and updating the stream output at it is added to. It is a little bit of an anti-pattern, and ideally we would do this in the code. If it is preferred to add this functionality to the library itself I can amend the design to do so.

Author: @strideynet I have thought about it and agree that this is not the best approach. I have updated the design document to reflect that, and will implement streaming in the library itself.

#### Future Improvements
* Store output somewhere other than locally on the server, like S3
* Look into using an external lib that enables tailing from an external source
* Utilize job management to allow suspending and resuming jobs instead of only being able to start and terminate them

## CLI
The CLI will utilize the [cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) CLI library.

### Run a process
The basic structure of the run command will be `run <binary_name> [<args>] [<options>]`

An example of running a process: `cmdctl run ls -la --user shawon`

### Get process info
The basic structure of the get-status and get-output retrieval commands will be: `get-status/get-output [<pid>] [<options>]`

An example of querying for process status: `cmdctl get-status 47854 --user shawon`

We will also have commands for stopping a process and getting the process output. They will follow a similar structure as the above examples.

> ### Client Authentication

Reviewer: How will the user's identity be encoded into the certificate?

Author: I did not account for that in this design as I didn't realize it was in the scope. If it is necessary to have a user identity added to the certificate for authentication I will add that to the design.

Reviewer: Yup - it's in-scope to leverage the mTLS certs for user authentication.

Author: Aha okay that makes sense. I will update the design document!

Author: @strideynet I have updated this section to include how we will include the user identity in the certificate.

High Level Overview

The proposed solution will be divided into three parts:
1. The server side library written in Go to interact with the Linux OS
2. The gRPC API to take in requests from the client, use the server side library to run jobs, and return responses to the client
3. The CLI that the client will use to send requests related to jobs to the API

## Scope

### In Scope
* Starting a process
* Terminating a process
* Getting a process’s status
* Streaming the output of a process 

### Not in scope
* Listing jobs
* Stopping and restarting processes
* Task resource management (CPU, memory, etc)
* User management
* Automated certificate creation

## Approach
The current approach for this project is to create something as simple and straightforward as possible. This means that I will not be using any external libraries or dependencies, and will try to leverage the Linux operating system’s existing tooling as much as possible instead of trying to reinvent the wheel. 

This design will cut a lot of corners and leave a lot of ideal functionality out of the initial implementation. I have noted things that should be considered as `Future Improvements` in each section.

## API

> The API will use gRPC to route requests from the client to the server. The API will run locally on the machine that is being managed from the client. We will have a single user on the machine we are running processes on named `processrunner`.

Reviewer 2: > We will have a single user on the machine we are running processes on named `processrunner`.

Is this stating that the server will be launching jobs as the `processrunner` user? If so, feel free to omit this to simplify.

> The API will accept POST requests for running processes and GET requests to return the status and output of a job. More detailed implementation details for the API can be found in the .proto document.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is describing a REST API, not a gRPC service.

At a high level the API will have the following methods on the localhost using port 9090:

### Run/Stop Methods
`RunProcess(RunProcessRequest)`
`StopProcess(StopProcessRequest)`

### Get Information Methods
`GetProcessStatus(ProcessStatusRequest)`
`GetProcessOutput(ProcessOutputRequest)`

> The POST to run the command will return the process identifier for the command issued to the client, which will be used for the GET requests for status and output.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is also describing a REST API.

### Future Improvements
* Run the server in a separate environment, such as kubernetes, which can allow for defining high availability through replicaSets and would move the API out from the domain of the operating system being managed
* Utilize some kind of data store (relational or not) to track processes instead of relying on the pid
* Include resource management of some kind to keep clients from over-taxing the operating system commands are running on
* Scope processes to users that map back to the clients on the operating system

## Server Authentication

### mTLS
The service will utilize mTLS to authenticate and secure requests. For this implementation we will manually create a single local CA certificate that will be used to generate a server side certificate and key pair. These certificates and keys will be stored locally for the server.

The server will enforce TLS version 1.3 for maximum security. The server will prefer the TLS13-AES-256-GCM-SHA384 cipher suite to have the best possible encryption standard while maintaining efficient performance. 

### Scoping Requests

> In order to scope requests to each client we will create a user for each client, and that will be authenticated against the user in the certificate sent from the client.

Reviewer 2: How is the client tied to a user?

Author: The client will tie to the user via a constant hardcoded in the cli (their email). Long term this should be something that is done via a configuration file.

My thinking then is the first part of the email will map to the user on the host.

#### Future Improvements
* Use a certificate provider for the CA instead of a locally generating one
* Utilize client certificate details to implement more fine grained access
* Implement a dedicated secret management solution for private keys, such as Vault or AWS Secret Manager (or any other secure key store)
* Automate certificate management going forward to remove human error and allow for easier revocation and rotation
* Add monitoring for certificate expiration and authentication failures

### Library
The library will primarily utilize the builtin os package in Go to interact with the Linux operating system and accomplish the actual job management functions.

The library will primarily utilize the os/exec builtin, with some use of the os/user and base level os builtin packages.

### Output streaming

> In order to reduce overhead each command will pipe output to a file named with the pid of the process. We will utilize server side streaming from gRPC to serve this data continually to the client until they close the connection or the process finishes.

Reviewer 2: When consuming the file to stream the data back to the user what happens if reading the file returns an io.EOF and the process is still running?

Author: My thinking here is we will check for an `io.EOF` error while streaming and we encounter one while the process is still running we will `continue` through the error, essentially ignoring that specific error, and keep streaming from the file. We will only interrupt if another type of error is encountered, the user cancels their command, or the process finishes.

#### Future Improvements
* Store output somewhere other than locally on the server, like S3
* Look into using an external lib that enables tailing from an external source
* Utilize job management to allow suspending and resuming jobs instead of only being able to start and terminate them

## CLI
The CLI will utilize the [cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) CLI library.

### Run a process
The basic structure of the run command will be `run <binary_name> [<args>]`

An example of running a process: `cmdctl run ls -la`

### Get process info

> The basic structure of the get-status and get-output retrieval commands will be: `get-status/get-output [<pid>]`

Reviewer 2: Does using the pid as a unique identifier for a job have any limitations?

Author: Yes it definitely does. A pid can potentially be reused by a new process if the original process terminates. 

We could use a combination of the pid and the start time as a unique identifier to reduce the risk of this happening. For this challenge I felt that it was unlikely to run into pid reuse, but ideally we would definitely want a more unique identifier.

Author: I thought about this more and did some research and came across the idea to create a symlink to an executable with a unique name. This is something I could do instead, generating a unique identifier for each process call that symlinks to the binary, then remove the symlink once the process finishes. 

Am curious what you think, or if you have any suggestions of what to look into to improve the reliability.

Author: We could instead create a file for each process that is run, using a combination of the username and a unique identifier, that has the pid of that specific process in it. This way we are tracking the process uniquely, but have access to the pid in order to stop it and check the status of it. 

I will add this to the document.

An example of querying for process status: `cmdctl get-status 47854`

We will also have commands for stopping a process and getting the process output. They will follow a similar structure as the above examples.

> ### Client Authentication

Reviewer 2: What about authorization? After you've identified a user, how and what will be enforced for the given identity?

Author: Once a user is identified and authenticated via the certificate all their actions will be scoped to allow executing binaries, reading data from the process output directory, and checking for process statuses.

Reviewer 3: If any authenticated user can perform any action then you're not really implementing any form of authorization.

I'd like to see some sort of decision after authentication but before performing any action to check whether the action is permitted.

Author: I have added wording around how we will authenticate users based on domain level of their email address for method access in the gRPC API. I can also scope that down further and have an explicit allow-list for emails if that is preferred.

The service will utilize mTLS to authenticate and secure requests. For this implementation we will manually create a single local CA certificate that will be used to generate a client side certificate and key pair. The CA will be trusted by the server to allow client certificates to connect. These certificates and keys will be stored locally for the client.

The client will enforce TLS version 1.3 for maximum security. Each client will need a certificate and key pair generated to interact with the server.

> When generating client certificates we will use the `-I` flag to set the user's identity. We will also use the `-n` flag to scope the client's access to their corresponding user on the host.

Reviewer: It's not very clear to me what CLI these flags are for - I would guess perhaps openssl but I don't think I recognise these flags.

Author: Ah yes sorry these are for openssl.  I can remove those specific flags so the design is less tool specific.

> When generating client certificates we will include the the user's identity and the principals on the host they have access to. These will be used as an additional layer of authentication server side to scope access to their user. 

Reviewer 2: Where will this information be included?

Author: My thinking on this includes both the CA and client cert. In the CA certificate, we'll use the `nameConstraints` field with an explicit `permitted` subtree that includes the user's email subdomain. 

On the client certificate itself we will include the user's email in the `subjectAltName` field so that the CA can validate their user against the constraint.

> Processes will be run as the user and log output will be stored under the user's home directory.

Reviewer 2: This is not required for this challenge.

## Approach
The current approach for this project is to create something as simple and straightforward as possible. This means that I will not be using any external libraries or dependencies, and will try to leverage the Linux operating system’s existing tooling as much as possible instead of trying to reinvent the wheel. 

This design will cut a lot of corners and leave a lot of ideal functionality out of the initial implementation. I have noted things that should be considered as `Future Improvements` in each section.

## API
The API will use gRPC to route requests from the client to the server. The API will run locally on the machine that is being managed from the client.

The API will accept requests for running processes as well as requests to return the status and output of a job. More detailed implementation details for the API can be found in the .proto document.

At a high level the API will have the following methods on the localhost using port 9090:

### Run/Stop Methods
`RunProcess(RunProcessRequest)`
`StopProcess(StopProcessRequest)`

### Get Information Methods
`GetProcessStatus(ProcessStatusRequest)`
`GetProcessOutput(ProcessOutputRequest)`

> The `RunProcess` method will return the process identifier for the command issued to the client, which will be used for the `StopProcess`, `GetProcessStatus`, and `GetProcessOutput` methods.

Reviewer 3: What is this process identifier? The OS-assigned PID?

Author: It was initially going to be the PID, but I have moved to instead generating a process identifier that should be more unique. I will clarify that in this block.

### Future Improvements
* Run the server in a separate environment, such as kubernetes, which can allow for defining high availability through replicaSets and would move the API out from the domain of the operating system being managed
* Utilize some kind of data store (relational or not) to track processes instead of relying on files
* Include resource management of some kind to keep clients from over-taxing the operating system commands are running on
* Scope processes to users that map back to the clients on the operating system

## Server Authentication

### mTLS

> The service will utilize mTLS to authenticate and secure requests. For this implementation we will manually create a single local CA certificate that will be used to generate a server side certificate and key pair. These certificates and keys will be stored locally for the server.

Reviewer 3: This describes how you will generate the server certificate, but that's TLS, not mTLS.

What about the client certificate(s)?

Author: I had put the client certificate portion further down under the `Client` heading. I can move that up here instead if that is helpful.

The server will enforce TLS version 1.3 for maximum security. The server will prefer the TLS13-AES-256-GCM-SHA384 cipher suite to have the best possible encryption standard while maintaining efficient performance. 

### Scoping Requests

> In order to scope requests to each client we will create a user for each client, and that will be authenticated against the user in the certificate sent from the client. The user on the host will match the first part of the email, before the `@`, which will be compared against the email we receive from the client. 

Reviewer 3: > will be authenticated against the user in the certificate

Can you elaborate? Where in the certificate is the user stored?

Author: This was noted further down in the Client portion, I've moved it up. It will be stored in the `subjAltName` field of the certificate.

The client will hard code this for now. Ideally this would be set via a configuration file. 

#### Future Improvements
* Use a certificate provider for the CA instead of a locally generating one
* Utilize client certificate details to implement more fine grained access
* Implement a dedicated secret management solution for private keys, such as Vault or AWS Secret Manager (or any other secure key store)
* Automate certificate management going forward to remove human error and allow for easier revocation and rotation
* Add monitoring for certificate expiration and authentication failures

### Library
The library will primarily utilize the builtin os package in Go to interact with the Linux operating system and accomplish the actual job management functions.

> The library will primarily utilize the os/exec builtin, with some use of the os/user and base level os builtin packages.

Reviewer 3: Nit: `builtin` in Go refers to the builtin funcs (append, make, len, cap, etc). I would 
```suggestion
The library will primarily utilize the standard library's os/exec package, with some use of the os/user and os packages.
```

### Output streaming

> In order to reduce overhead each command will pipe output to a file named with the a unique identifier tied to the process. This data will be read from the file when requested. We will check to see if the process is still running to determine whether or not to continually read from and stream data from the file, or serve all the output data at once to the client. 

Reviewer 3: Can you include more details on this? Is this what you're thinking?

- Read from file, first read succeeds with valid data
- Read from file again, this read returns EOF since you reached the end of the file
- Check whether process is still running, if not, return.
- If process is still running, read again.

Author: That is generally what I am thinking yes. I will expand on that as well in the document.

In the cases where processes are still running we will utilize server side streaming from gRPC to serve this data continually to the client until they close the connection or the process finishes.

#### Future Improvements
* Store output somewhere other than locally on the server, like S3
* Look into using an external lib that enables tailing from an external source
* Utilize job management to allow suspending and resuming jobs instead of only being able to start and terminate them

## CLI
The CLI will utilize the [cobra](https://github.com/spf13/cobra) CLI library.

### Run a process
The basic structure of the run command will be `run <binary_name> [<args>]`

An example of running a process: `cmdctl run ls -la`

### Get process info
The basic structure of the get-status and get-output retrieval commands will be: `get-status/get-output [<unique_process_id>]`

> An example of querying for process status: `cmdctl get-status shawon-ls-idhhyqm`

Reviewer 3: How are you generating this `shawon-ls-idshhyqm` ID?

Author: I can expand on this more in the block above, but essentially this will be generated from the name sent in the client cert, the command being run, and a randomly generated string.

### Client Authentication
The service will utilize mTLS to authenticate and secure requests. For this implementation we will manually create a single local CA certificate that will be used to generate a client side certificate and key pair. The CA will use the `nameConstraints` extension to allow access only to a specific subdomain. In the case of this challenge it will be `permitted:.example.com`. The CA will be trusted by the server to allow client certificates to connect. These certificates and keys will be stored locally for the client.

The client will enforce TLS version 1.3 for maximum security. Each client will need a certificate and key pair generated to interact with the server.

When generating client certificates we will include the the user's email, in the case of this challenge `shawon@example.com`, in the `subjectAltName` field. This will be used as an additional layer of authentication by the CA to ensure only users with an email matching the allowed subdomain can be validated. 

> Once the user has been validated their access will be scoped to allow the following on the host via group, which their user will be added to:

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I follow this. Are you saying that you will create an OS-level user for each API user?

Author: Yes, the way I was thinking about the gRPC service is it would do mTLS authentication to check whether or not the client has access to run processes. Then the gRPC service would reach out to the host and check whether or not that user has access to the host. 

It seems like I may be thinking about this incorrectly and that the gRPC service should track both the authentication and authorization of the user on the host?

Author: I have updated the document to include authorizing user access to methods based on email domain. I hope this addresses the authorization issues. 

Ideally long term this would be scoped to users or groups, and would use some form of additional authorization such as a token or oauth flow. For this challenge I felt like making sure that the users are in the domain we want them to be is sufficient.

* Automate certificate management going forward to remove human error and allow for easier revocation and rotation
* Add monitoring for certificate expiration and authentication failures
* Implement an actual authorization scheme such as JWT, Oauth 2.0, etc
* Use more fine grained groups such as AD, LDAP, or some other management to give more fine grained restrictions to methods for users

### Library
The library will primarily utilize the standard library's os package in Go to interact with the Linux operating system and accomplish the actual job management functions.

The library will primarily utilize the standard library's os/exec package, with some use of the os/user and base level os library packages.

### Output streaming
In order to reduce overhead each command will pipe output to a file named with the a unique identifier tied to the process. This data will be read from the file when requested. We will check to see if the process is still running to determine whether or not to continually read from and stream data from the file, or serve all the output data at once to the client. 

The flow of this will be something like:

> * Read from the file starting at the first line and stream each line to the client

Reviewer 2: What if the file is one continuous line?

* If at any point we reach the end and get an EOF error, check to see if the process is still running
* * If the process is no longer running, return. 

> * If the process is still running, continue reading and streaming from the file while ignoring EOF errors (but break on any other error)

Reviewer 2: Per the challenge requirements:

> Discovering new output should be efficient, avoid busy-waiting or polling.
